# MD

This project contains the code to power a Markdown word processor for your web-browser. It uses PouchDB for in-browser storage.

# Creating an offline-first editor

[PouchDB](http://pouchdb.com/) allows web apps to be created which store data locally in an in-browser memory store. In this case we are using the browser as a word processor, one that will continue to work while you are disconnected from the internet. It has the following features:

* data is entered in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) format
* documents saved in local PouchDB database
* preview of finished document rendered side-by-side with the Markdown
* complete version history of the document is retained i.e. every time "Save" is pressed, a new document is added to the database
* the local PouchDB database can be synced with a [CouchDB](http://couchdb.apache.org/) or [Cloudant](https://cloudant.com/) database for backup
* when printed, only the rendered HTML version reaches the page

## Manifest files

In order for your app to be work offline, the app needs to instruct the browser to retain some files locally for offline use. A project's manifest file contains a list of urls that need to cached by the browser e.g. the site's home page and all of its Javascript and CSS assets.

## PouchDB

[PouchDB](http://pouchdb.com/) is an in-browser database. In a few lines of code, Javascript objects can be saved an retrieved using the browser's internal storage. As no internet connection is required after the browser has loaded the page, PouchDB is a great tool to create offline-first applications. Here's some example code to create a database 'md' and add a simple document to it:

    var db = new PouchDB("md");
    var doc = { name: "fred", body: "Document body" };
    db.post(doc, function(err, data) {
      console.log("Saved", err, data);
    });

PouchDB is NoSQL data store; it does not force you to define a database schema up front, nor does it force you to follow the same document pattern for every document in the database. For this application, the documents look like this:

    {
      "_id": "23966717-5A6F-E581-AF79-BB55D6BBB613",
      "_rev": "1-96daf2e7c7c0c277d0a63c49b57919bc",
      "doc_id": "0d7c2bf2-d9d5-4db3-a412-5f85aa8d2f76",
      "doc_name": "Markdown Reference",
      "body": "Lorem Ipsum",
      "ts": 1422358827
    }

The __\_id__ and __\_rev__ are auto-generated by PouchDB. The **doc_id** is generated programmatically by us and is used to uniquely identify a document. The same **doc\_id** may appear in several PouchDB documents, representing different iterations of the same document. Each document has a **doc\_name**, **body** and **ts**, representing the name, the Markdown of the document and the Unix timestamp when the document was saved.

This technique of only ever writing to the database (instead of continually updating the same document) prevents conflicts arising if data is replicated, while at the same time,  maintaining a useful version history of every document. 

## Markdown

Markdown is a simple text-based syntax that allows basic document formatting to be defined and converted programmatically into HTML. The full Markdown syntax reference can be found here <http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax>.

## Syncing with Cloudant

This web app can function quite happily, saving its data to your local web browser. For a real-world application, however, we may wish to backup our store of documents to the Cloud. With PouchDB this is easy, as PouchDB is compatible with CouchDB's replication protocol. Cloudant, which is based on CouchDB, is also a compatible target for PouchDB replication. With a single line of code, your local PouchDB database is synced to the cloud:

    db.sync("https://myusername:mypassword@myhost.cloudant.com/mydb");

Simply:

* [Sign-up for a Cloudant account](https://cloudant.com/sign-up/)
* Create a new database in the Cloudant Dashboard
* In the permissions tab, generate a new api key
* Make the generated api have "reader" & writer access
* Enable CORS access
* Construct the url: https://APIKEY:PASSWORD@HOSTNAME.cloudant.com/DATABASE_NAME
* Paste the url into the settings tab of the web app and press save.

The app will save your Cloudant URL in a different PouchDB database. When the app loads again, it will retrieve the Cloudant URL from local storage and re-initialise synchronisation.
